---
title: "Discovery of Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers"
abbrev: DEER
docname: draft-pauly-add-deer-latest
date:
category: std

ipr: trust200902
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
  -
    ins: T. Pauly
    name: Tommy Pauly
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: One Apple Park Way
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: tpauly@apple.com
  -
    ins: E. Kinnear
    name: Eric Kinnear
    org: Apple Inc.
    street: One Apple Park Way
    city: Cupertino, California 95014
    country: United States of America
    email: ekinnear@apple.com
  -
    ins: C. A. Wood
    name: Christopher A. Wood
    org: Cloudflare
    street: 101 Townsend St
    city: San Francisco
    country: United States of America
    email: caw@heapingbits.net
  -
    ins: P. McManus
    name: Patrick McManus
    org: Fastly
    email: mcmanus@ducksong.com
  -
    ins: T. Jensen
    name: Tommy Jensen
    org: Microsoft
    email: tojens@microsoft.com

--- abstract

This document defines Discovery of Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers (DEER), a
mechanism for DNS clients to use DNS records to discover a resolver's encrypted
DNS configuration. This mechanism can be used to move from unencrypted DNS to
encrypted DNS when only the IP address of an encrypted resolver is known. It can
also be used to discover support for encrypted DNS protocols when the name of an
encrypted resolver is known. This mechanism is designed to be limited to cases
where equivalent encrypted and unencrypted resolvers are operated by the same
entity.

--- middle

# Introduction

When DNS clients wish to use encrypted DNS protocols such as DNS-over-TLS (DoT)
{{!RFC7858}} or DNS-over-HTTPS (DoH) {{!RFC8484}}, they require additional
information beyond the IP address of the DNS server, such as the resolver's
hostname, non-standard ports, or URL paths. However, common configuration
mechanisms only provide the resolver's IP address during configuration. Such
mechanisms include network provisioning protocols like DHCP {{?RFC2132}} and
IPv6 Router Advertisement (RA) options {{?RFC8106}}, as well as manual
configuration.

This document defines two mechanisms for clients to discover equivalent
resolvers using DNS server Service Binding (SVCB, {{I-D.ietf-dnsop-svcb-https}})
records:

1. When only an IP address of an Unencrypted Resolver is known, the client
queries a special use domain name to discover DNS SVCB records associated with
the Unencrypted Resolver ({{bootstrapping}}).

2. When the hostname of an encrypted DNS server is known, the client requests
details by sending a query for a DNS SVCB record. This can be used to discover
alternate encrypted DNS protocols supported by a known server, or to provide
details if a resolver name is provisioned by a network ({{encrypted}}).

Both of these approaches allow clients to confirm that a discovered Encrypted
Resolver is equivalent to the originally provisioned resolver. "Equivalence" in
this context means that the resolvers are operated by the same entity; for
example, the resolvers are accessible on the same IP address, or there is a
certificate that claims ownership over both resolvers.

## Specification of Requirements

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14
{{?RFC2119}} {{?RFC8174}} when, and only when,
they appear in all capitals, as shown here.

# Terminology

This document defines the following terms:

DEER:
: Discovery of Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers. Refers to the mechanisms defined
in this document.

Encrypted Resolver:
: A DNS resolver using any encrypted DNS transport. This includes current
mechanisms such as DoH and DoT as well as future mechanisms.

Equivalent Encrypted Resolver:
: An Encrypted Resolver which is considered to provide answers equivalent to a 
given resolver. This equivalency can be authenticated with TLS certificates.

Unencrypted Resolver:
: A DNS resolver using TCP or UDP port 53.

# DNS Service Binding Records

DNS resolvers can advertise one or more Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers that
offer equivalent services over encrypted channels and are controlled by the same
entity.

When a client discovers Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers, it learns information
such as the supported protocols, ports, and server name to use in certificate
validation. This information is provided in Service Binding (SVCB) records for
DNS Servers, defined by {{!I-D.schwartz-svcb-dns}}.

The following is an example of an SVCB record describing a DoH server:

~~~
_dns.example.net  7200  IN SVCB 1 . (
     alpn=h2 dohpath=/dns-query{?dns} ipv4hint=x.y.z.w )
~~~

The following is an example of an SVCB record describing a DoT server:

~~~
_dns.example.net  7200  IN SVCB 1 dot.example.net (
     alpn=dot port=8530 ipv4hint=x.y.z.w )
~~~

If multiple Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers are available, using one or more
encrypted DNS protocols, the resolver deployment can indicate a preference using
the priority fields in each SVCB record {{I-D.ietf-dnsop-svcb-https}}.

This document focuses on discovering DoH and DoT Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers.
Other protocols can also use the format defined by {{!I-D.schwartz-svcb-dns}}.
However, if any protocol does not involve some form of certificate validation,
new validation mechanisms will need to be defined to support validating
equivalence as defined in {{authenticated}}.

# Discovery Using Resolver IP Addresses {#bootstrapping}

When a DNS client is configured with an Unencrypted Resolver IP address, it
SHOULD query the resolver for SVCB records for "dns://resolver.arpa" before
making other queries. Specifically, the client issues a query for
`_dns.resolver.arpa` with the SVCB resource record type (64)
{{I-D.ietf-dnsop-svcb-https}}.

If the recursive resolver that receives this query has one or more Equivalent
Encrypted Resolvers, it will return the corresponding SVCB records. When
responding to these special queries for "dns://resolver.arpa", the SVCB records
SHOULD contain at least one "ipv4hint" and/or "ipv6hint" keys. These address
hints indicate the address on which the corresponding Encrypted Resolver can be
reached and avoid additional DNS lookup for the A and AAAA records of the
Encrypted Resolver name.

## Authenticated Discovery {#authenticated}

In order to be considered an authenticated Equivalent Encrypted Resolver, the
TLS certificate presented by the Encrypted Resolver MUST contain both the domain
name (from the SVCB answer) and the IP address of its equivalent Unencrypted
Resolver within the SubjectAlternativeName certificate field. The client MUST
check the SubjectAlternativeName field for both the Unencrypted Resolver's IP
address and the advertised name of the Equivalent Encrypted Resolver. If the
certificate can be validated, the client SHOULD use the discovered Equivalent
Encrypted Resolver for any cases in which it would have otherwise used the
Unencrypted Resolver. If the Equivalent Encrypted Resolver has a different IP
address than the Unencrypted Resolver and the TLS certificate does not cover the
Unencrypted Resolver address, the client MUST NOT use the discovered Encrypted
Resolver. Additionally, the client SHOULD suppress any further queries for
Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers using this Unencrypted Resolver for the length of
time indicated by the SVCB record's Time to Live (TTL).

If the Equivalent Encrypted Resolver and the Unencrypted Resolver share an IP
address, clients MAY choose to opportunistically use the Encrypted Resolver even
without this certificate check ({{opportunistic}}).

## Opportunistic Discovery {#opportunistic}

There are situations where authenticated discovery of encrypted DNS
configuration over unencrypted DNS is not possible. This includes Unencrypted
Resolvers on non-public IP addresses whose identity cannot be confirmed using
TLS certificates.

Opportunistic Privacy is defined for DoT in Section 4.1 of {{!RFC7858}} as a
mode in which clients do not validate the name of the resolver presented in the
certificate. A client MAY use information from the SVCB record for
"dns://resolver.arpa" with this "opportunistic" approach (not validating the
names presented in the SubjectAlternativeName field of the certificate) as long
as the IP address of the Encrypted Resolver does not differ from the IP address
of the Unencrypted Resolver, and that IP address is a private address (such as
those defined in {{!RFC1918}}). This approach can be used for DoT or DoH.

If the IP addresses of the Encrypted and Unencrypted Resolvers are not the same,
or the shared IP address is not a private IP address, the client MUST NOT use
the Encrypted Resolver opportunistically.

# Discovery Using Resolver Names {#encrypted}

A DNS client that already knows the name of an Encrypted Resolver can use DEER
to discover details about all supported encrypted DNS protocols. This situation
can arise if a client has been configured to use a given Encrypted Resolver, or
if a network provisioning protocol (such as DHCP or IPv6 Router Advertisements)
provides a name for an Encrypted Resolver alongside the resolver IP address.

For these cases, the client simply sends a DNS SVCB query using the known name
of the resolver. This query can be issued to the named Encrypted Resolver itself
or to any other resolver. Unlike the case of bootstrapping from an Unencrypted
Resolver ({{bootstrapping}}), these records SHOULD be available in the public
DNS.

For example, if the client already knows about a DoT server
`resolver.example.com`, it can issue an SVCB query for
`_dns.resolver.example.com` to discover if there are other encrypted DNS
protocols available. In the following example, the SVCB answers indicate that
`resolver.example.com` supports both DoH and DoT, and that the DoH server
indicates a higher priority than the DoT server.

~~~
_dns.resolver.example.com  7200  IN SVCB 1 . (
     alpn=h2 dohpath=/dns-query{?dns} )
_dns.resolver.example.com  7200  IN SVCB 2 . (
     alpn=dot )
~~~

Often, the various supported encrypted DNS protocols will be accessible using
the same hostname. In the example above, both DoH and DoT use the name
`resolver.example.com` for their TLS certficates. If a deployment uses a
different hostname for one protocol, but still wants clients to treat the DNS
servers as equivalent, the TLS certificates MUST include both names in the
SubjectAlternativeName fields. Note that this name verification is not related
to the DNS resolver that provided the SVCB answer.

For example, being able to discover an Equivalent Encrypted Resolver for a known
Encrypted Resolver is useful when a client has a DoT configuration for
`foo.resolver.example.com` but is on a network that blocks DoT traffic. The
client can still send a query to any other accessible resolver (either the local
network resolver or an accessible DoH server) to discover if there is an
equivalent DoH server for `foo.resolver.example.com`.

# Deployment Considerations

Resolver deployments that support DEER are advised to consider the following
points.

## Caching Forwarders

If a caching forwarder consults multiple resolvers, it may be possible for it to
cache records for the "resolver.arpa" Special Use Domain Name (SUDN) for
multiple resolvers. This may result in clients sending queries intended to
discover Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers for resolver `foo` and receiving answers
for resolvers `foo` and `bar`.

A client will successfully reject unintended connections because the
authenticated discovery will fail or the resolver addresses do not match.
Clients that attempt unauthenticated connections to resolvers discovered through
SVCB queries run the risk of connecting to the wrong server in this scenario.

To prevent unnecessary traffic from clients to incorrect resolvers, DNS caching
resolvers SHOULD NOT cache results for the "resolver.arpa" SUDN other than for
Equivalent Encrypted Resolvers under their control.

## Certificate Management

Resolver owners that support authenticated discovery will need to list valid
referring IP addresses in their TLS certificates. This may pose challenges for
resolvers with a large number of referring IP addresses.

# Security Considerations

Since client can receive DNS SVCB answers over unencrypted DNS, on-path
attackers can prevent successful discovery by dropping SVCB packets. Clients
should be aware that it might not be possible to distinguish between resolvers
that do not have any Equivalent Encrypted Resolver and such an active attack.

While the IP address of the Unencrypted Resolver is often provisioned over
insecure mechanisms, it can also be provisioned securely, such as via manual
configuration, a VPN, or on a network with protections like RA guard
{{?RFC6105}}. An attacker might try to direct Encrypted DNS traffic to itself by
causing the client to think that a discovered Equivalent Encrypted Resolver uses
a different IP address from the Unencrypted Resolver. Such an Encrypted Resolver
might have a valid certificate, but be operated by an attacker that is trying to
observe or modify user queries without the knowledge of the client or network.

If the IP address of an Equivalent Encrypted Resolver differs from that of an
Unencrypted Resolver, clients MUST validate that the IP address of the
Unencrypted Resolver is covered by the SubjectAlternativeName of the Encrypted
Resolver's TLS certificate ({{authenticated}}).

Opportunistic use of Encrypted Resolvers MUST be limited to cases where the
Unencrypted Resolver and Equivalent Encrypted Resolver have the same IP address
({{opportunistic}}).

# IANA Considerations {#iana}

## Special Use Domain Name "resolver.arpa"

This document calls for the creation of the "resolver.arpa" SUDN. This will
allow resolvers to respond to queries directed at themselves rather than a
specific domain name. While this document uses "resolver.arpa" to return SVCB
records indicating equivalent encrypted capability, the name is generic enough
to allow future reuse for other purposes where the resolver wishes to provide
information about itself to the client.

--- back

# Rationale for using SVCB records {#rationale}

This mechanism uses SVCB/HTTPS resource records {{!I-D.ietf-dnsop-svcb-https}}
to communicate that a given domain designates a particular Equivalent Encrypted
Resolver for clients to use in place of an Unencrypted Resolver (using a SUDN)
or another Encrypted Resolver (using its domain name).

There are various other proposals for how to provide similar functionality.
There are several reasons that this mechanism has chosen SVCB records:

- Discovering encrypted resolver using DNS records keeps client logic for DNS
self-contained and allows a DNS resolver operator to define which resolver names
and IP addresses are related to one another.

- Using DNS records also does not rely on bootstrapping with higher-level
application operations (such as {{?I-D.schinazi-httpbis-doh-preference-hints}}).

- SVCB records are extensible and allow definition of parameter keys. This makes
them a superior mechanism for extensibility as compared to approaches such as
overloading TXT records. The same keys can be used for discovering Equivalent
Encrypted Resolvers of different transport types as well as those advertised by
Unencrypted Resolvers or another Encrypted Resolver.

- Clients and servers that are interested in privacy of names will already need
to support SVCB records in order to use Encrypted TLS Client Hello
{{!I-D.ietf-tls-esni}}. Without encrypting names in TLS, the value of encrypting
DNS is reduced, so pairing the solutions provides the largest benefit.

- Clients that support SVCB will generally send out three queries when accessing
web content on a dual-stack network: A, AAAA, and HTTPS queries. Discovering an
Equivalent Encrypted Resolver as part of one of these queries, without having to
add yet another query, minimizes the total number of queries clients send. While
{{?RFC5507}} recommends adding new RRTypes for new functionality, SVCB provides
an extension mechanism that simplifies client behavior.
